---
title: Working with Remote Hosts
layout: post
speakers:
  - speaker:
    name: Alex Townsend
    affil: Cornell University
    url: http://www.math.cornell.edu/~ajt/
---

# Overview
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- [Convenient Login to Remote Hosts](#convenient-login-to-remote-hosts)
    - Log into remote hosts using `ssh`.
- [Git: An enthusiastic user's point-of-view](#git-an-enthusiastic-users-point-of-view)
    - Presentation by Alex Townsend.
    - Overview of using `git` and related tools (e.g. GitHub) effectively.
        - Working with collaborators, managing students.
- [Game Changing Git](#game-changing-git)
    - Wield the `git difftool` and `git difftool`.
- [Version Control with Large Files](#version-control-with-large-files)
    - Special considerations are needed when working with large data.
- [Configuration is Key](#configuration-is-key)
    - An example repository to clone and configure your Unix terminal.

# Convenient Login to Remote Hosts
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Terminology

- The server you are logging into is called the `remote` (host).
- The user (you) are referred to as the `client`.
- When referring to clusters, you may come across the following terms:
    - The `master` node (sometimes called `head`).
    - The `slave` nodes (the workers).
    - You often are only allowed to log into the `master` node.
    - There is usually a queuing system (e.g. `qsub`) that submits `jobs`
      that get farmed out to the (available) slaves.
    - In most scenarios, you get charged by the number of cores / resources you
      are using.

### Required Setup

If you are _not_ on campus, then you will not be able to log into our cluster.
You can identify if this is the reason you are unable to login if you try and
`ssh` in and the command just hangs (use `ctrl+c` to kill it).  To have an
on-campus IP address, you will need to use the Cornell VPN.

Follow the directions to install and run the VPN [here](http://www.it.cornell.edu/services/vpn/howto/index.cfm).

- Your login is your Cornell NetID and corresponding password (e.g. what you
  would enter to log into studentcenter).

### The Tool

<div class="panel-group">
  <div class="panel panel-default">
    <div class="panel-heading">
      <h4 class="panel-title">
        <a data-toggle="collapse" href="#sshcommand"><code>ssh</code> - Secure SHell</a>
      </h4>
    </div>
    <div id="sshcommand" class="panel-collapse collapse">
      <div class="panel-body">
        <p><code>ssh [opts] &lt;username@remote.host&gt;</code></p>
        <ul>
          <li><code>username</code> is the username on the <i>remote</i> host.</li>
          <li><code>remote.host</code> is the url of the server you want to log into.</li>
          <ul>
            <li>IP Address: <code>128.253.51.103</code></li>
            <li>Symbolic name: <code>en-cs-totient-01.coecis.cornell.edu</code></li>
          </ul>
          <li>Use <code>-l</code> to specify username (no need for <code>@</code> anymore).</li>
          <li><code>-p &lt;port&gt;</code>: connect to a specific port (may be necessary depending on the server).</li>
          <li>Can forward graphical <i>programs</i> (NOT the entire screen):</li>
          <ul>
            <li>Enable <code>X11</code> forwarding with <code>-X</code>.</li>
            <li>Enable "trusted" <code>X11</code> forwarding with <code>-Y</code> (actually less secure, only use if needed).</li>
          </ul>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

We will be using `ssh`, which is a secure shell login protocol.  This tool
enables you to login into and execute commands on the _remote_ using the
terminal on your _client_.

The instructions below are for Unix systems.  If you are using Windows, browse
through the below to understand the workflow, then follow the directions in the
[SSH for Windows](#ssh-for-windows) section below.

So, since my `username` on Totient is my Cornell NetID (in this case `sjm324`),
I could log into Totient using both of the following:

```bash
# Using the symbolic name
$ ssh sjm324@en-cs-totient-01.coecis.cornell.edu
# Using the IP Address:
$ ssh sjm324@128.253.51.103
```

### Making SSH Convenient

Rarely would you actually want to enter your username or password everytime you
try and log into a server.  The solution is to use SSH Keys.  For these, there
are

1. A **public** key you copy to any cluster / server you are working with
   - Generated with a `.pub` file name.
2. A **private** key that you should never share with anybody.
   - Generated with a `_rsa` postfix to the name of your key by default.

The steps are simple enough:

1. Generate your SSH key (if you do not have one).  Follow the instructions in
   [this tutorial](https://help.github.com/articles/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent/).
   - For the following steps, I assume you generated the files
       - The public key 'id': `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`
       - The private key 'id': `~/.ssh/id_rsa`
   - If you entered something else, change the commands below accordingly.
2. Add the newly generated SSH key to your it to your keychain:

   ```bash
   # Adds the key to your ssh keyring
   $ ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_rsa
   ```

   Note that we are adding the **private** key to our local ssh keyring, not
   the public key.
3. We need to copy the public component of the key to the host.  The directions
   below are inlined from [here](http://www.linuxproblem.org/art_9.html), replace
   all instances of `<NetID>` with your NetID.

   ```bash
   # Create the ~/.ssh directory on the remote
   $ ssh <NetID>@en-cs-totient-01.coecis.cornell.edu mkdir -p .ssh
   # Copy the public part of the key from the client to the host
   $ cat .ssh/id_rsa.pub | ssh <NetID>@en-cs-totient-01.coecis.cornell.edu 'cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys'
   ```

   At this point, you have now registered your SSH key with Totient.  You can now
   use passwordless login:

   ```
   $ ssh en-cs-totient-01.coecis.cornell.edu
   ```
4. Typing the entire host name the entire time is tedious.  We will setup a
   config file on the client (your computer).

   ```bash
   # Create the file if it does not exist
   $ touch ~/.ssh/config
   ```

   Now edit it with your favorite text editor to include

   ```
   Host totient
   Hostname en-cs-totient-01.coecis.cornell.edu
   User <NetID>
   ForwardAgent yes
   ```

With all that, you should now be able to just execute

```bash
$ ssh totient
```

and login to the Totient cluster.  Every now and then you may be asked to enter
the password for your actual SSH key, but this will not be that frequent.

## SSH for Windows
By default, Windows does not have an SSH client.  If you are not using Cygwin or
Bash for Windows 10, you will need to install 3rd party software (that is well
established and reliable).

1. To login to a server as well as generate SSH keys, you will need to download
   Putty (the program to log into remote hosts with) and PuttyGen (to generate
   the keys).  These can both be downloaded from [here](http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/download.html).
2. To set up SSH, follow the tutorial [here](http://the.earth.li/~sgtatham/putty/0.60/htmldoc/Chapter8.html).

# Git: An enthusiastic user's point-of-view
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Presentation courtesy of Alex Townsend.

**Abstract**:

_Git is a version control system that is changing the way
collaborative projects (software, courses, research, etc.) can be managed. It is
widely regarded as a superior alternative to svn, Dropbox, and Google docs for
mildly tech-savvy individuals. I will discuss the basic workflow for Git and
Github as an enthusiastic everyday user._

### [Slides](https://orgsync.com/145925/files/1084912/download)

# Game Changing Git
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Two extraordinarily powerful tools with `git` are the `difftool` and the
`mergetool`.  They are exactly what they sound like:

1. The `difftool` allows you to view what has changed between the **last
   commit** and now.
2. The `mergetool` allows you to have `git` present all of the merge conflicts
   for you automatically.  You can then fix the conflicts and write the file(s)
   to successfully merge!

## GUI Options
At this point, the most popular GUI client appears to be
[meld](http://meldmerge.org/).  If you are developing on OSX, then when you
installed XCode, you received a copy of 'FileMerge'.

## Terminal Options
It is worth mentioning that when you are working on a cluster, you will not be
able to have a gui client launch without significant effort.  If you are already
familiar with `vim`, then the following commands will enable you to use `vim`
to assist with your merges and diffing.

1. Tell `git` to use `vim` for the `git difftool`.  For starters, `vimdiff` is
   not the only tool.  If you execute `git difftool` in your terminal, it should
   inform you that it is not set, and list the options available.  Try them out!

   ```bash
   # set vimdiff as the difftool
   $ git config --global diff.tool vimdiff
   # if you want, let `git d` serve as an alias
   $ git config --global alias.d difftool
   ```

   Go find a repository and start changing files.  Compare the differences
   between running `git diff` and `git difftool` from your terminal.  We are
   confident you will never go back.

2. Tell `git` to use `vim` for the `git mergetool`.  As with before, `vimdiff`
   is not the only tool.  If you execute `git mergetool` in your terminal, it
   should inform you that it is not set, and list the options available.  Try
   them out!  _Note_: you will probably want to keep your `difftool` and your
   `mergetool` as the same thing, if only for coherence in presentation.

   ```bash
   # tell git to use vimdiff as the mergetool
   $ git config merge.tool vimdiff
   # the diff3 conflict style tends to be easier to read
   $ git config merge.conflictstyle diff3
   # always open up the merge conflicts automatically
   $ git config mergetool.prompt false
   ```

   These instructions were pasted from [here](http://www.rosipov.com/blog/use-vimdiff-as-git-mergetool/)
   for convenience.  This article is invaluable in explaining what is going on
   when using `vimdiff` as your merge tool.

   Once you get comfortable, you will probably want to also execute

   ```bash
   # http://stackoverflow.com/a/1251696/3814202
   $ git config --global mergetool.keepBackup false
   ```

   so that all of those `*.orig` files after a merge conflict are not generated.
   You're tracking the code with `git` after all, if you really break things you
   have both commits on their own and can just re-do the merge if necessary.

# Version Control with Large Files
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Git is far from the only version control system out there.  You are likely to
encounter many forms in the wild, but generally speaking the most popular tools
are `git`, `svn`, and `hg` (mercurial).  While they achieve similar tasks, they
are somewhat fundamentally different.

Since `git` is a decentralized version control system, you should avoid tracking
large files with it.  Any time there is a small change on a binary file (such as
your datasets, game assets, or even pdf's), a binary diff is generated and
stored in the history.  Over time, these small changes produce huge git
repositories without any real need.

None of the options below are perfect, but they are at least functional.

### Git Annex

[Git Annex](https://git-annex.branchable.com/) is an excellent tool for this
purpose.  It has been around for a while and is reliable.  The downside is that
anybody who would want to clone your repository must also have `git-annex`
installed.

### Git Large File Storage (LFS)

[Git LFS](https://git-lfs.github.com/) is a relatively new tool that attempts
to solve the underlying issues of using `git` with large files similar to how
[git submodules](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules) are
handled.  Instead of directly tracking files, a brief text file with a pointer
to a repository and commit (an LFS server) are stored.

This tool is new, and still has a lot of room for growth.  Although in theory
widespread adoption of this tool would benefit the service providers (GitHub,
Atlassian, etc.), this is not quite the reality.  Most providers are going to
bill you by bandwidth used, meaning if you pay for a 1GB quota and have a 500MB
data file, you got to upload and download your file once.  Then you will get
billed for every clone after.

The solution at this point in time, if you have the resources, would be to setup
your own `git-lfs` server and host your data there.  Note that some service
providers will only enable `git-lfs` for **public** repositories.

### Using just mercurial (`hg`)

Mercurial has large files extension, you can learn more [here](https://www.mercurial-scm.org/wiki/LargefilesExtension).

### Using `git` and `svn` together

Since `svn` is centralized, it is an effective tool for tracking large files.
Tracking your code with `svn`, though, is (in this author's opinion) less
effective than `git` due to how merge conflicts are resolved.  In general, you
should be good to go if you use:

1. `git` to track your code.
2. `svn` to track your data.
    - E.g. if you have a `data` directory in your repository, add that to your
      `.gitignore`, and use `svn` to clone your actual `data` repo there.

There exists a `git-svn` tool described in [this article](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v1/Git-and-Other-Systems-Git-and-Subversion),
but you may have better mileage if you just manually control the repositories
and provide explicit instructions on your README of how to get all the necessary
data for your project.

# Configuration is Key
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You may feel like your terminal is uncomfortable, or wish it could look better.
Now that you have the ability to access a cluster, if you want to get some
practice cloning a repository as well as make your terminal more appealing in
one step, follow the directions [here](https://github.com/cs2043-sp16/simple-dotfiles).
