---
title: Using the Totient Cluster
layout: post
---

# Overview
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- [Minimalist Bash Scripting](#minimalist-bash-scripting)
    - Enough to be able to write PBS submission scripts for totient.
- [Queuing jobs on Totient](#queuing-jobs-on-totient) (using `qsub`).
    - Brief example repository for `C` programs using `make`.
- [Bash Scripting Revisited](#bash-scripting-revisited)
    - You will want to be able to make your job scripts flexible.
- [Multiplexing a Terminal](#multiplexing-a-terminal) (using `tmux`).
- [Shared Terminal Sessions](#shared-terminal-sessions) (using `tmux` and `tmate`).

# Minimalist Bash Scripting
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bash scripting can get somewhat complicated if you want to use it as a tool for
processing.  However, if you just need a simple script to submit jobs to a
cluster, there are only a few key items you need to know.

1. You can create local variables in your script.  Like other scripting
   languages, types of variables are implicit.  You can use a variable as a
   string, and then later set it to a number.

   ```bash
   # Create a string variable
   MY_STR="Some thing"
   # Create an integer
   MY_INT=12
   ```

   *Note*: in Bash, you only have integers.  If you create a 'real number',
   it will be treated as a string.
2. You can dereference the value of a variable by prefixing a `$` to the name of
   the variable.  The following will all print the value of each variable to the
   console:

   ```bash
   # Printing the local variables define above
   echo "The string is: $MY_STR"
   echo "The integer is: $MY_INT"
   # You also have access to the many 'environment variables'
   echo "The current working directory is: $PWD"
   echo "The C compiler you have set is: $CC"
   echo "The shell you are using is: $SHELL"
   ```

   _Note_: if the `C` compiler line did not print anything for `$CC`, then you
           have not set this environment variable.  That is not a problem.
3. Bash is particularly sensitive about whitespace.

   ```bash
   # Whitespace around the equals sign will break
   MY_VAR = "Some value"
   ```
4. There is a difference between single and double quotes.  In single quotes,
   special characters (`\`, `$`, `!`, `?`, and `*` are some) are used literally.
   In double quotes, they keep their special meaning.

   **Using double quotes**:

   ```bash
   VAR="The string $MY_STR is not equal to $MY_INT."
   echo "$VAR"
   ```
   will print `The string Some thing is not equal to 12.` to the console.

   **Using single quotes**:

   ```bash
   VAR='The string $MY_STR is not equal to $MY_INT.'
   echo "$VAR"
   ```
   will print `The string $MY_STR is not equal to $MY_INT.` to the console.

   **Note 1:**

   Even the syntax highlighting for the above is different, most text editors do
   this as well.  Generally you will be fine using **double** quotes.  When
   writing more complicated scripts, it is useful to know that you can bypass
   special characters (if you have used `sed`, you have fought this before).

   **Note 2:**

   Whitespace revisited.  You have access to the same `printf` function as `C`
   in your shell.  If we do

   ```bash
   VAR="The string $MY_STR is not equal to $MY_INT."
   printf "%s\n" "$VAR"
   ```

   it will work.  However, if we change it to

   ```bash
   VAR="The string $MY_STR is not equal to $MY_INT."
   printf "%s\n" $VAR
   ```

   it will perform differently.  This is another example of the sensitivity of
   whitespace in Bash.  When you have `"$VAR"`, putting it inside the double
   quotes says 'form this as a single entity'.  When you have `$VAR`, the
   contents are expanded as is.  Since there were spaces in the original string,
   they are now treated as separate arguments.  `printf` will complain because
   there are now more arguments being supplied than format specifiers (`%s` in
   this case).


# Queuing jobs on Totient
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="panel-group">
  <div class="panel panel-default">
    <div class="panel-heading">
      <h4 class="panel-title">
        <a data-toggle="collapse" href="#qsubcommand"><code>qsub</code> - Submit a PBS Job</a>
      </h4>
    </div>
    <div id="qsubcommand" class="panel-collapse collapse">
      <div class="panel-body">
        <p><code>qsub [opts] &lt;job-script.pbs&gt;</code></p>
        <ul>
          <li>Usually, the majority of the work is done by <code>job-script.pbs</code></li>
          <li>
            Read the man page!  There are a lot of important environment
            variables that <code>qsub</code> defines for the script.
          </li>
          <ul>
            <li>The one you will use most frequently: <code>$PBS_O_WORKDIR</code></li>
            <li>
              E.g. <code>cd $PBS_O_WORKDIR</code> in the script so the executable
              can be found
            </li>
          </ul>
          <li>
            The other common argument you will use is the <code>-v</code> flag,
            which allows you to supply arguments to the job script.
          </li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

The best way to understand how this all works is by running through some examples!
To start, we will run through examples 1, 2, and 3 in the [example repository](https://github.com/cornell-ssw/Totient-Demo).

# Bash Scripting Revisited
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now that you know how to use `qsub`, the next thing you will probably want to
be able to do is supply arguments to your PBS script.  Ordinarily, when you want
to use command-line arguments in Bash you can refer to them using

<center>
<div class="table-responsive">
    <table class="table table-striped table-bordered">
      <colgroup>
        <col class="col-xs-2">
        <col class="col-xs-10">
      </colgroup>
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th>Variable</th>
          <th>Value</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tr>
        <td><code>$0</code></td>
        <td>The name of the script.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>$1</code></td>
        <td>The first command-line argument.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>$2</code></td>
        <td>The second command-line argument.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>...</code></td>
        <td>...</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>$n</code></td>
        <td>The nth command-line argument.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>$*</code></td>
        <td>All command line arguments concatenated.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>$@</code></td>
        <td>The command line arguments as an array.</td>
      </tr>
    </table>
  </div>
</center>

However, with `qsub`, if you want to provide your script with command-line arguments
you will need to use the `-v` flag in conjunction with _default arguments_.

In the fourth example provided in the [example repository](https://github.com/cornell-ssw/Totient-Demo),
we are scripting the number of processors requested.  The `main` method reads this as an
additional command-line argument.  In the job script
[job-pi-parallel-v2.pbs](https://github.com/cornell-ssw/Totient-Demo/blob/master/Parallel_PI_v2/job-pi-parallel-v2.pbs),
we now use a default argument:

```bash
P_NUM_THREADS=${NUM_THREADS:-1}
```

This will create a variable `P_NUM_THREADS` that has a default value of `1`.  The syntax
is a little strange, noting that the `-` indicates the default is to follow (as in the
default value here is `1`, **not** `-1`).  The way it works is it tries to read in the
environment variable `NUM_THREADS`.  If the variable is found, then this will perform

```bash
P_NUM_THREADS=$NUM_THREADS
```

if it is not found, then it will perform

```bash
P_NUM_THREADS=1
```

Now, in order to provide a value for `NUM_THREADS`, we call `qsub` with

```bash
qsub -v NUM_THREADS=<value> job-pi-parallel-v2.pbs
```

This will define the environment variable `NUM_THREADS` for the pbs script, and
you would replace `<value>` with the number of threads you would like to use.

The corresponding script to call this job script with a few different numbers
of threads is
[batch_jobs.sh](https://github.com/cornell-ssw/Totient-Demo/blob/master/Parallel_PI_v2/batch_jobs.sh).
It is important to remember that on most clusters you will be billed by compute time,
which is related to the number of nodes / processors per node that you request.  In the
example script, we are intentionally varying the number of threads used (e.g. for a scaling study).
In general, you will not need to do this but instead will normally want to request all
of the nodes / threads you can ;)

# Multiplexing a Terminal
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Terminal multiplexing sounds like an advanced topic, but it is actually quite
simple.  The idea is to be able to leave a session open on one computer, and
return to it later (e.g. to see if your computation has finished).  In conjunction
with `ssh`, this is an immensely powerful tool that you are encouraged to use.

In addition to being able to join the session again from another computer via
`ssh`, the majority of terminal multiplexers provide simple keyboard shortcuts
to allow you to spawn new terminals with ease.  For example, if you had a single
terminal open in a terminal multiplexer, with a simple keyboard shortcut you could
split the screen vertically and have another terminal session open.  No need to
open a new terminal, navigate to where you want to go, and potentially use your
window manager to position the original terminal on the left half and the new
terminal on the right half.

There are many situations in which this could expedite your workflow.  For example,
suppose you were writing a `C` program, working on `foo.c` with a terminal-based
text editor (e.g. `emacs` or `vim`).  You realize that one of the methods you
are writing needs to have the method signature changed in both `foo.c` and `foo.h`.
Simply split the screen, open `foo.h` with your text editor, save the changes,
and close the new pane.  You never even needed to close the terminal editing `foo.c`!

While there are many multiplexers available (Screen, iTerm2, ...), we use `tmux`.
`tmux`, like many programs, will look for a configuration file in your _home_
directory.  Specifically, `tmux` will look for the file `~/.tmux.conf`.  Remember
that if your username was `someUser`, then the file would be `/home/someUser/.tmux.conf`.

`tmux` functions without a configuration file, but you will ultimately want to
make one.  You are welcome to use the `.tmux.conf` hosted
[here](https://github.com/cs2043-sp16/simple-dotfiles/blob/master/tmux/tmux.conf)
to get you started, read the various options customized in the file and change
accordingly (e.g. if your default shell is `zsh`, you will need to change the
first to configurations).

**Warning**: for compatibility with `vim`, the default `ctrl+b` action trigger
for `tmux` has been **remapped** to `ctrl+a`.  Honorable mentions:

<center>
<div class="table-responsive">
    <table class="table table-striped table-bordered">
      <colgroup>
        <col class="col-xs-3">
        <col class="col-xs-9">
      </colgroup>
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th>Keyboard Sequence</th>
          <th>Action Performed</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>v</code></td>
        <td>Split current terminal pane <b>vertically</b>.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>s</code></td>
        <td>Split current terminal pane <b>horizontally</b>.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>z</code></td>
        <td>Maximize (or un-maximize) current terminal pane.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>h</code></td>
        <td>Make terminal pane to the <b>left</b> the active pane.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>j</code></td>
        <td>Make terminal pane <b>below</b> the active pane.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>k</code></td>
        <td>Make terminal pane <b>above</b> the active pane.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+a</code> then <code>l</code></td>
        <td>Make terminal pane to the <b>right</b> the active pane.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><code>ctrl+d</code></td>
        <td>Close active terminal pane.  If only one, ends <code>tmux</code> session</td>
      </tr>
    </table>
  </div>
</center>

**Warning**: if you use `vim` in `tmux` and accidentally hit `ctrl+s`, you have activated
a feature of `tmux` you probably did not intend.  Gain control of `vim` again with `ctrl+q`.

Lastly, if you want to

- leave a session running but get terminal back: `tmux detach`
- view all active `tmux` sessions: `tmux list-sessions`
- attach to a `tmux` session: `tmux attach -t <session_number>`
    - `tmux attach` with no session number joins the most recently used _unattached_ session.

# Shared Terminal Sessions
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are many ways to share terminal sessions, but we rather enjoy `tmate`.  It
will use all of your `tmux` configurations, but will enable you to allow others
to view what you are typing in your terminal both via `ssh` or via a web browser.

Simply execute `tmate show-messages` to obtain the URLs for both, noting that you
should `clear` your screen immediately!  `tmate` allows users to join AND write
to your terminal (if you give them the associated URL), so you will want to
make sure to hide the URLs shown by `tmate show-messages` for read-only sessions.

**Note**: there is a known bug with `tmate` where if users `ssh` into a read-only
session, the only way to leave the session is to close the terminal entirely.
This can be problematic if a user was say already in a `tmux` session that was
important to them, so make sure you warn your users ahead of time!

Checkout the samples at [tmate's website](https://tmate.io/).
