---
title: Red Cloud and the MATLAB Distributed Computing Server (MDCS)
layout: post
speakers:
  - speaker:
    name: Steve Lantz
    affil: Cornell University
    url: http://www.cac.cornell.edu/slantz/
---

# Overview
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- [Red Cloud and the MATLAB Distributed Computing Server (MDCS)](#red-cloud-and-the-matlab-distributed-computing-server-mdcs)
    - Introduction to Red Cloud and its features
    - Quick demo of MATLAB work farmed out to Red Cloud using MDCS
    - Overview of the MATLAB Parallel Computing Toolbox (PCT)
    - Insights on various ways to run MATLAB computations in a cloud using PCT

# Red Cloud and the MATLAB Distributed Computing Server (MDCS)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Presentation courtesy of Steve Lantz.

**Abstract**:

_Red Cloud is Cornell's university-wide private cloud for research computing, maintained
by the Center for Advanced Computing. Subscribers can meet their on-demand computing
needs by launching one or more virtual server instances of up to 28 CPU cores each from
two pools comprising 472 total cores. Red Cloud is based on HPE Helion Eucalyptus; this
opens up the possibility for extra-large workloads to burst out to the Amazon cloud, as
Eucalyptus is fully compatible with Amazon Web Services. Red Cloud instances are
commonly managed through a Web-based user console, which also allows Elastic Block
Storage (EBS) volumes to be defined and attached to instances._

_This presentation focuses on one potential use of Red Cloud, namely, to act as a host
for MDCS clusters. MDCS is probably the ultimate strategy for accelerating MATLAB
computations. The first step to parallelize a MATLAB script through the mechanisms
provided in the Parallel Computing Toolbox. If local CPU cores do not offer enough
speedup for your PCT computations, then it may be possible to scale out to Red Cloud and
bring more resources to bear. I will demo the process of launching a Red Cloud MDCS
instance, connecting to it from a MATLAB R2016a client, and speeding up a PCT-enabled
computation through the use of multiple workers in the cloud. I will also talk about the
various modes of PCT usage, and discuss when it might make sense to introduce one or
more of these into your MATLAB scripts._

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed" data-id="4fcf620eb5e849f7ae00f068a914d584" data-ratio="1.33333333333333" src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>
