---
title: Numerical Software Engineering
subtitle: A Literature Review
layout: post
speakers:
  - speaker:
    name: Eric Lee
    affil: Cornell University
---

# Overview
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- [Numerical Software Engineering](#numerical-software-engineering)
    - A summarization of best scientific software practices.
    - Examples ranging from writing cleaner code to project management software. 

# Numerical Software Engineering
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Presentation courtesy of Eston Schweickart

**Abstract**:

_Building clean software and writing clean code is hard! While most scientists
without formal training do so through trial and error, possessing software
engineering skills proves invaluable for anyone writing scientific software.
There exist a number of papers on best practices when writing numerical code.
This week we will present the following selection of papers:_

- [Barely Sufficient Software Engineering: 10 Practices to Improve Your CSE Software][sandia]
- [Best Practices for Scientific Computing][bpsc]
- [Good Enough Practices in Scientific Computing][gepsc]

_Written by the Software Carpentry people and developers of Trilinos at Sandia,
these papers have somewhat guided the agenda for this club. While we have
devoted significant effort towards a subset of topics (such as version control,
documentation, etc), we have largely skipped over helpful pointers and tips
these papers contain. Therefore, this meeting will cover these tips and tricks.
Some of these will be review from last semester (covered to help any newcomers),
while others will be covered down the road._

[sandia]: http://www.sandia.gov/~maherou/docs/BarelySufficientSoftwareEngineering.pdf
[bpsc]:   https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.0530
[gepsc]:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.00037

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9">
  <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1qVEqRSdh_FmYcwYeal3L8aXywssMy1QHsYQFaxFusic/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000">
    <p>Your browser does not appear to support iframe elements.</p>
  </iframe>
</div>
