---
title: Mathematica == Fun(ctions)
layout: post
speakers:
  - speaker:
    name: Varun Gandhi
    affil: Cornell University
    url: https://theindigamer.github.io/
---

# Overview
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- [Mathematica == Fun(ctions)](#mathematica--functions)
    - An overview of the numerous features of Mathematica (_Wolfram Language_).
    - Complex procedures are easy with [functional programming][fun].
    - Demonstrations with included code for everything you need to get started!

# Mathematica == Fun(ctions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Presentation courtesy of Varun Gandhi.

**Abstract**:

_Mathematica is the Swiss Army knife of computational programs; it provides rich and
easy-to-use facilities for symbolic computation, numerics and visualization.  By
integrating all three in a single general purpose programming language, it enables
faster prototyping and greater knowledge reuse. After a quick showcase of awesome stuff
made using a few lines of Mathematica, we will discuss the basics of using Mathematica
and how it can help improve your workflow. We will also briefly discuss functional
programming in this context._

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Varun has also prepared some excellent materials for you to wield in getting started!

- [The HTML export of his presentation][present_html]
    - Have Mathematica installed? [Here is the notebook that generated that][present_book]
- [A one page cheat sheet for your reference][cheat]

[present_html]: ssw-presentation/ssw-presentation.htm
[present_book]: ssw-presentation.nb
[cheat]: cheat-sheet/ssw-cheat-sheet.htm
[fun]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming
